ZELT Marais, het sy misnoeë uitgespreek oor lafhartige amptenare in leierskapstrukture van WP Rugby wat die media gebruik om hul eie agendas te dryf. Die president van die WP Rugby het Sondag in ’n sterk bewoorde brief aan Son die gedrag van sekere direksielede wat hulself aan sulke verraad skuldig maak, as ’n “skande”” beskryf. Hier is Zelt Marais se volledige verklaring in Engels: I am indeed saddened to address you at this time when we as the executive leadership of the Union and shareholder directors on the board of Western Province Professional Rugby should be collectively and as one remain focused on fighting to minimize the impact of Covid-19 on the business of rugby in Cape Town, the Western Cape, South Africa and indeed the world. The effect of this pandemic on rugby in the Western Cape and specifically in Cape Town has been profound. Daily my office is being informed of the passing of people in rugby in Cape Town that leave communities, families and community sport organisations reeling with shock and disbelief. Through my personal experiences of the illness and loss of people through this virus, I can today testify that the effects of Covid-19 is akin to us being in a state of war, the effects of this pandemic will live with us through a “new normal” for decades and centuries to come. It is against this backdrop that I want to express my extreme disappointment and report to you that officials you elected and/or appointed to the leadership structures of WP Rugby chose to serve the organisation through the media. The rules of engagement between colleagues at these forums had always been robust, respectful and honest. On numerous occasions senior members were requested to denounce these unsavory behavioral traits and pledge their loyalty to the Union (either as an elected executive member or a director appointed to represent the shareholder that elected him to such a trusting position or as an appointed independent director serving WP Rugby). The majority of our members serving the Union at these levels find the behavior of members that make themselves guilty of such treasonous acts as disgraceful and unbecoming of a leader, and I again call on any person serving WP Rugby in this manner to rather vacate your position with honor or to immediately stop this need you have to misuse your position of trust to feed the media information that is mostly quoted out of context or leaked with the sole purpose of influencing outcomes in the boardroom. I cautioned the WP Rugby community in my letter to them on 24 June 2020 about this behavior of “colleagues” acting in cahoots with members of the media and must sadly report that these cowardly acts by our “own” continues unabatedly to the detriment of the rugby people in the Cape during a time when we are all focusing on comforting a person that lost a loved one, a family member, a friend, a colleague, a neighbor or a member in our rugby clubs that we played or worked with as volunteers. Words cannot fully describe my sadness and disappointment today in calling out these members. Considering the current wave of misinformation being spread to the world by our media houses, allow us as your executive leadership to confirm to you our approach in dealing with the following matters: • WP Rugby signed an exclusivity agreement with MVM Holdings (USA), LLC allowing us to negotiate with them on a strictly confidential manner about an equity offer made to the Union in respect of the WP Professional Ruby Company. The transaction and the details thereof remains strictly confidential at this stage and we wish to assure you that any transaction agreed to will be subject to it being financially structured to best serve the long term interest of the Union being the 100% shareholder, and will only be concluded with the formal blessing of our constituent shareholders at the appropriate forum and time. The Shareholder has over the past four years lent and invested in excess of R100 million to and its Professional Arm on the condition that the latter entity as a minimum show a breakeven budget in 2020 and start repaying its debts to the said Shareholder from 2021 onwards. The business of the Professional Arm has over the past 12 months primarily, but for one been managed and controlled by its independent directors. • The term of office of two of our independent board members have naturally come to an end over the last few months and the executive leaders felt it prudent at this time to transform the make-up of our group of independent directors on the board to become more inclusive from a demographic perspective. This is an ideal that we as WP Rugby remain committed to as our contribution to achieve the targeted transformation goals of government as advanced through the Minister of Sport and SA Rugby. • The financial challenges faced by the Union are like all sporting organisations across the world, brought on by the devastating effects of Covid-19. During April 2020 the Union and the board of WP Professional Rugby concluded an agreement with the South African Rugby Employers Organisation (SAREO – a body that the Union is not a member of) protecting a continuous income for our players and staff until 31 December 2020. This was done at a time in the interest of the wellbeing of our loyal players and staff without knowing the ultimate effect of the pandemic on our business. • Today we can confirm that the only rugby activity we will see for the remainder of the 2020 rugby season is the eight professional rugby franchises that will compete in a national domestic competition over two months, the remainder of all other rugby activities are cancelled. The effect of this decision on the financial stability of WP Rugby remains unprecedented, but we always assure you of our efforts to minimise this effect honestly and respectfully while keeping you all updated. • The executive leadership in November 2019 appointed the Human Resources (HR) committee to conduct a comprehensive audit of WPRugby HR policies, procedures and practices. The process was intended to be followed up by recommendations to improve our human capital practices. This process was however severely impacted by Covid-19, but due to the devastating effect of the pandemic on the business of WP Rugby it will only be responsible to ensure that this committee resume its activities albeit in a “new normal” fashion. Let us further assure you that any findings, recommendations and/or actions from an HR perspective, including the possible restructuring of our business, will be conducted with the assistance of world class advisors in a responsible manner in consultation with all stakeholders. I leave you with the words of Barack Obama, (44th President of the United States of America), in his address to the Northwestern University Commencement on 16 June 2006 in Chicago, Illinois who said “… There’s a lot of talk in this country about the federal deficit. But I think we should talk more about empathy deficit – the ability to put ourselves in someone else’s shoes; to see the world through those who are different from us – the child who’s hungry, the laid-off steelworker, the immigrant woman cleaning the dorm…” These words could not be more appropriate during this time when we as a country and a world are faced by a pandemic like Covid-19, a disaster that WP Rugby is not immune to. Today the greatest challenge we face is poverty and I am delighted to confirm our partnership with United Ways (a global nonprofit organisation who made available food parcels for the hungry. WP Rugby with the assistance of our staff and our affiliated clubs will distribute these gifts to the needy in our communities. We applaud the ongoing social outreach initiatives conducted by some of our clubs and their members as their contribution to minimise the effect of the pandemic on our collective lives as rugby loving people serving our communities. Now is not the time to try and score cheap points and use media channels to grandstand about ourselves and/or our future, now is the time to express thanks and appreciation for knowing that you are better off than the person next to you during this pandemic, now is the time to collectively take hands as an entire rugby community and breach the “empathy deficit” that Mr Barack Obama spoke about. Let us firstly focus on helping others face death, the loss of a loved one, hunger, cold and unemployment before we worry about the next great deal, or the next rugby contract beyond the British and Irish Lions tour in 2021, important as it may be, our priorities should now be on showing empathy, and not confirming that we have an “empathy deficit” as the WP Rugby community. I thank you for showing leadership in contributing to the fight against this pandemic and I proudly express my support to your efforts to assist our people. Warm regards.