VERSKEIE bekende afrigters en voormalige rugbyspelers het hul stem gevoeg by voormalige en huidige krieketsterre se ondersteunig van die #BlackLivesMatter-veldtog en sistemiese rassisme wat in Suid-Afrikaanse sport plaasvind of onder die mat gevee word. Van die bekendes wat Woensdag ‘n verklaring uitgereik het sluit in die voormalige Blitsbok-afrigter Paul Treu, die voormalige Springbokafrigter Peter de Villiers en oud-Springbokke soos Khaya Molotana, Thando Manana, Hilton Lobberts en Wayne Julies. Die ondertekende verklaring (in Engels) lui: What was hidden has come out. It is clear that there may be other “white” sportspersons and others in South Africa who continue to have world views that are shaped by racism. The negative response to the comments from Lungi Ngidi identified the fault lines within cricket and society. Current and former Protea players publicly supported his views on this matter.  Since the global outcry for “Black Lives Matter” and the movement’s continuous fight against racism and inequality, rugby administrators in South Africa have remained mum on this topic. Although SA Rugby made big strides to ensure our playing squads are representative at national level, the uninterrupted exclusion of head coaches and top administrators, classified as Black in terms of the equality laws of South Africa, continues.  Most rugby unions in South Africa will quickly play the numbers game that coaching structures and administrators are indeed well represented at all levels, but it is at senior and strategic level where “job reservation” continues. It is here that most positions are reserved for their white counterparts. Black coaches, administrators and service providers continue to be excluded as head coaches, Directors of Rugby, High Performance Managers, CEO’s or providers of professional expertise.  The facts are: 100% exclusion of Black Head Coaches at Springbok, SA U20, Pro14, Super Rugby and Premier Currie Cup.  100% exclusion of Black CEOs. 100% exclusion of Blacks as High Performance Managers.  Often the question is asked, why didn’t you speak out when you were players and even now as coaches or former players? The answer is quite simple, those with the courage to speak out are marginalised and forced to seek employment outside rugby or sport. It is this fear of losing employment and being left without a plan B that is making the number of people on this list a little less than anticipated. We can no longer live in fear and our inner voices won’t be silenced any more. From the time of colonialism, into apartheid there has been uninterrupted “white” control of the top coaching and administrative posts. This inequality must stop and the victimisation of critical voices must end.  In this month where we celebrate Nelson Mandela, let us recommit to the ideals that he stood for and end inequality in sport and oppose racism wherever it exists. As former players and coaches in South Africa, we stand in solidarity with Lungi Ngidi, the BLM Movement and calls for equality in rugby.Signed by: 1.    Mac Masina2.    John Williams3.    Ashwin Willemse4.    Adrian Jacobs5.    Wayne Julies6.    Vuyo Zangqa7.    Peter de Villiers8.    Thando Manana9.    Labeeb levy10.    Jonathan Mokuena11.    Paul Treu12.    David Manuel13.    Hilton Lobberts14.    Danwel Demas15.    Gary Boshoff16.    Deon Carelse17.    Nirven Arendse18.    Norman Jordaan19.    Eddie Fredericks20.    Johan Mettler21.    Wilbur Kraak22.    Anvor Schooney23.    Aschin Klein24.    Bronson Weir25.    Reginald Nutt26.    Chumani Booi27.    JP Kellerman28.    Jearus Nicholas29.    Carlos Katywa30.    Saaid Blake31.    Darryl Coeries32.    David Hendricks33.    Sino Ganto34.    Brendal Brandt35.    Sammy Horne36.    John Booysen37.    Travor Pieterse38.    Wylie Seroot39.    Tiger Mangweni40.    Denzil Frans41.    Neil Papier42.    Jerome Pietersen43.    Nazeem Adams 44.         Warren Petersen45.         David Maidza46.         Therlow Pietersen47.         Kaya Malotana